The next element of project control is the configuration management plan.
This is controlling the versions and content of the project deliverables.
The project deliverables are those features that'll be in
different releases of your project,
so we want to manage and control the different versions of release one,
release two,
and release three and what features or elements will be
included in each of those releases.
Let's see why we should do configuration management.
First and foremost, it's used to manage application releases and bug fixes.
An application release may contain one or more features
of the application you're building.
And while you're building your application you might receive
some bug fixes that you must attend to while you're making
your application; therefore,
you'll need a configuration management system to manage this.
Secondly, protect your source code.
You don't want the source code to only be on the desktop of a
programmer in case the hard drive fails or things like that,
so you want all the source code to ultimately be up in one place,
on a server for example, so it can be maintained and managed and won't be lost.
So there are many configuration management tools in
the market such as Microsoft TFS, Team Foundation Server,
Subversion, GIT, and there are many others.
And my recommendation to you is pick one,
one of these or some others, and use it and follow it.
Now typically you can create a branch that represents one or more features.
A branch is really going to be a copy of all the software in your application,
typically,
but you're going to give is a name like release one or something like
that so that you can implement that within that branch,
implement that feature or features or implement a big fix
or several bug fixes within that branch.
So here are some sample names like release 1 or bug fix 12345.
Those would be the names of the branch.
Next when the branch is complete you can merge it back into the
test branch or back into a larger chunk of code.
And you may have heard these terms before,
branching and merging,
and all good software configuration tools support these features.
You need these features, and you need a process in order to manage your software.
Then from within these branches then you can make builds or
compiles to create releases for testing,
executables for testing.
And a little tip here is these tools may not be very good at
managing non-software deliverables for release.
So maybe a release is coordinated with some hardware or a release is
coordinated with some training and things like that,
so you may need to have an adjunct or a parallel task list or
schedule that goes along with this if you have some other
non-software deliverables to release as well.
So here's your configuration road map or suggested plan.
First,
your plan would include selecting the configuration management tool like
we discussed before like TFS or Subversion or GitHub.
Your plan would include hey I going to need to train
all of my software development staff,
I'm going to then institute a configuration management process,
I'm going to follow your process.
In other words, you may have naming conventions,
release cycles, and things like that.
And a tip if the change management process adds or
removes items from the requirements,
you want to be sure that you update your configuration planning,
your versioning's and releases, to reflect that.
In other words,
you may want to remove a task from a branch or maybe even remove a branch
from your plans so if upstream some requirements have changed you'll want
to makes sure you reflect those changes down into your planning process
for configuration management.
Here's a simple configuration management process as an example to get you going.
Each release will contain a list of features or deliverables, you know, things.
We want you to use very simple,
business oriented descriptions to describe those deliverables
and then assign a branch name to each release.
For example, Release 1.
0 (Branch) it's going to cover the order screen,
order summary report, shopping cart, and user manual.
Very simple English-oriented features,
easy for a stakeholder or a customer to read and understand.
You may have a variety of other detailed tasks under
the hood that relate to this branch, but they don't need to see those.
Release 1.
1.
We're going to do accounts receivable, open accounts report,
and five new computers will be ordered as well.
In other words,
maybe those five new computers won't be part of your
software configuration management,
but they need to be part of your overall release management.
Sometimes we use big, huge stickies like this on a white board,
lay it all out so it's very easy for people to walk by and see exactly
what's going to be in each release as we go forward. It's a great, simple example.